Before we dive into how we can apply machine learning to medical imaging,
let's learn some basics about clinical workflows that involve 2D imaging.
Here again, we'll focus on x-rays.
Previously, we learned about this medical imaging workflow that starts with the patient,
moves to the radiologist who produces
a report which is then read by a diagnosing clinician.
Before we dive into how we can apply machine learning to this,
let's learn some basics in the process that involved 2D imaging.
Machine learning is mainly involved before the images arrive at the radiologist.
Before images get to a radiologist's hands,
they are stored in a Picture Archiving and Communication System.
Every imaging center and hospital has a PACS.
These systems allow all medical images to be stored in
the hospital's servers and transferred to different departments throughout the hospital.
In the clinical workflow,
we can broadly bucket imaging into two categories, diagnostic and screening.
Diagnostic imaging happens when a clinician believes that there
may be something wrong with the patient and they need imaging to verify.
An example of diagnostic imaging
is in a patient's brain to verify if he has a brain tumor.
Diagnostic imaging can happen in emergency settings as well as non-emergency settings.
Screening imaging happens when a clinician
doesn't necessarily believe there's something wrong with the patient,
but the patient falls into a high risk category
and needs to be scanned regularly for early detection.
For example, individuals over a certain age with
a family history of colon cancer are given annual screening colonoscopies.
In these types of imaging studies,
the majority of patients have negative results.
Screening usually happens in non-emergency settings.
Let's talk more about diagnostic imaging in the workflow.
In emergency situations, a diagnosis may be very time sensitive.
For example, surgeons need to verify if a patient in the OR has a bleed in their brain.
So a machine learning algorithm in this situation would be used very early
on in the imaging workflow in order to
obtain insights from the image as fast as possible.
In non-emergency situations where the radiologist may
not need to read an image right away, for example,
assessing tumor growth of a pre-existing cancerous tumor in
the lungs or a patient waiting for results of potential bone fracture in their arm.
In these cases, it's okay if your algorithm doesn't run
immediately and it may not be necessary until later in the workflow.
In screening imaging, it's almost always the case that
your algorithm does not need to be run immediately in the workflow,
as these types of studies are never urgent.
For example, a six year-old smoker routinely has lung cancer screenings.